1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effects of Rising Temperatures and Drought on Rice Production  
In the United States of America  
By: Nishkal Hundia  
Dr. Lars Olson, AREC280  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
Abstract  
This paper aims to investigate the impact of climate elements, notably escalating 
temperatures and drought occurrences, on rice farming in the United States. By analyzing 
extensive datasets covering several decades, the research aims to discern patterns in  
temperature changes during critical phases of rice cultivation and the prevalence of drought 
events. The findings reveal a trend of steadily rising average temperatures during rice -growing 
months over recent decades. While maximum temperatures remained re latively consistent, the 
consistent increase in minimum temperatures led to a narrower temperature range, potentially 
placing strain on rice crops known to thrive within specific temperature thresholds. 
Temperature variances and rice yield growth, while being statistically significant , did not impact 
the yield growth much  at either local or national scales. Conversely, the influence of drought 
emerges as a significant and distinct factor affecting rice yield. There is an evident negative 
relationship betwee n yield growth and drought severity. A notable reduction in yield growth is 
observed as drought severity intensifies, displaying statistical significance across both localized 
and national levels. These outcomes emphasize the susceptibility of rice farming  in the US to 
drought events, highlighting the substantial challenge faced in maintaining consistent 
productivity.  
Significance Statement  
 Rice is a vital food crop on a global scale and analyzing the impact of climate change and 
drought on yield growth ca n reveal invaluable insights that will help improve yield in the future. 
Examining drought's impact on US rice yield highlights a critical correlation with climate change. 
Understanding these dynamics is essential for safeguarding rice production against 
environmental challenges especially because rice is considered to be a highly drought -
susceptible plant.  3 
 
Introduction  
 Rice is among the worlds most important food crops. Research into rice is crucial for the 
development of technologies that will increase productivity for farmers who rely on rice for 
their livelihood (*Zeigler & Barclay, 2008). Rice is a major staple among two -thirds of the 
worlds population (*Sen et al., 2020).  By the worlds standards, per capita rice consumption in 
the United States is  not very large, but it has been consistently increasing over the last several 
decades, reaching a level of 21.0 lb per capita annually currently (*Batres -Marquez et al., 2009). 
United States exports about 40 -45 percent of its rice crop each year, mostly t o Mexico, Central 
America, South America, the Caribbean, etc., and accounts for around 5 percent of the annual 
volume of global rice trade ( USDA ERS - Trade , n.d.). Rice is also a source of nutrition and health 
benefits for the U.S. population, as it is lo w in fat and sodium, cholesterol -free, and rich in 
complex carbohydrates and essential vitamins and minerals ( USDA ERS - Rice Sector at a 
Glance , n.d.).  
 Drought is the leading threat to agricultural food production, especially in the cultivation 
of rice, a semi -aquatic plant (*Oladosu et al., 2019). Rice is considered one of the most drought -
susceptible plants due to its small root system, thin cuticular wax, and swift stomata closure  
(*Sahebi et al., 2018). Drought is a very devastating and costly natura l disaster. From 1980 to 
2022, droughts caused extensive losses in the United States ($344.9B CPI -adjusted economic 
losses) accounting for roughly 13% of total losses from weather and climate disasters 
(noaa.gov, 2023). Similarly, increasing temperatures c an also have a drastic impact on rice 
production. Most of the rice in the US is currently cultivated in regions where temperatures are 
above the optimal temperature for the growth of rice, which is 22 -28 degrees Celsius or 71 -87 
degrees Fahrenheit (Krishna n et al., 2011). Any further increase in mean temperature or 
episodes of high temperatures during sensitive stages may reduce rice yields drastically.  This 4 
 
study aims to explore the impacts of drought and changing temperatures on the Yield Growth 
of Rice in the United States of America over time.  
Results:  
 To understand the potential impacts of changing temperatures, we will first assess 
trends over time of various temperature variables. Figure 1 shows the variation of the mean 
temperature during the rice -growing and harvesting months in the US (April - August) from 
1960 to 2020. As can be seen, there has been a steady increase in overall mean temperatures 
over the last few decades. Figure 2 shows the changes in the mean of the maximum (T max) and 
minimum ( Tmin) temperatures from 1960 to 2020 during the rice -growing and harvesting 
months in the US. The graph on the left in Figure 2 shows T min increasing significantly over time 
whereas the graph on the right shows T max not varying as much. This explains the d ecrease in 
the difference between T max and T min from 1960 to 2020 as shown in Figure 3.  
Figure 4 shows a graph of growth in the Yield of rice at the county level vs the change in 
the difference between T max and T min of their respective years. The graph al so contains a linear 
regression line which is almost horizontal . Fitting a linear regression model on the county  level  
showed that, although statistically significant,  change in the difference between minimum and 
maximum temperatures did not cause much cha nge in  yield growth, where a 1-degree  
Fahrenheit increase in  the differences leads to a 0.4% reduction in yield, as can be seen in Table 
1. Not much changed when fitting to country -level data as can be seen in Table 2 , with a 1 -
degree increase in the difference leading to a 1.9% reduction in yield. The country level case is 
also represented by Figure 4.  Moreover, changes in the mean temperature over time also 
proved  to be statistically significant when trying to model yield growth, as shown in Tables 1  
and 2 , but yet again, its impact on the value of yield growth was not major.  5 
 
Drought is another factor that was tested for any correlation to the yield growth of rice 
over time. Figure 5 represents the variation of the mean Palmer Drought Severity Index d uring 
the rice sowing and growing months (March -July) by year. It shows consistent repetition of 
drought occurrences over time in the US and the almost horizontal linear regression line is a 
further indication of the same. Figure 6 shows the graph of yield  growth vs the Change in Mean 
Palmer drought severity index. The blue line represents a linear regression line which shows a 
clear fall in yield growth with increasing drought severity index. The change in the value of 
drought severity is revealed to be st atistically significant at both the county level and the 
country level as revealed in Tables 1 and 2 respectively , with a 1.3% decrease in yield growth 
with a 1 -point change in the drought severity index at county level and a 2.2% decrease at the 
country l evel. The country level condition is represented in Figure 6.  
Discussion:  
The results show the intricate relationship between climate variables like rising 
temperatures and drought, and their impact on rice production in the United States. The 
increase in mean temperatures during crucial rice -growing months over the past few decades, 
as seen in Figures 1 and 2, presents a concerning trend. While the maximum temperatures 
(Tmax) have not changed as much, the consistent rise in minimum temperatures (T min) lead s to a 
reduction in the gap between the T max and T min as seen in Figure 3. This narrowing temperature 
range can be indicative of potential stress on rice crops , as these crops can only thrive within a 
specific temperature band (Krishnan et al., 2011).  
The correlation between change in temperature difference and rice yield growth, 
although statistically significant, was not very evident . This does not directly agree with the 
literature reviewed, but the statistical significance of temperature variables  sugge sts a complex 6 
 
relationship where other factors might interplay or mitigate the impact of temperature 
variations on rice yields.  
The impact of drought on rice yield growth, however, appears more pronounced and  is 
also statistically significant. The Palmer D rought Severity Index, one of the most widely used 
drought indicators, was used to measure the impact of drought on rice yield (*Wang et al., 
2022). demonstrates a recurring pattern of drought occurrences during the crucial rice sowing 
and growing months a s seen in Figure 5. The analysis depicted in Figure 6 shows a clear 
negative correlation between yield growth and change in drought severity at the country level. 
As the severity of drought increases, the yield growth reduces considerably, revealing a stro ng 
correlation  at both state and country levels, as represented in Tables 1 and 2. These results 
confirm the fact that rice is highly susceptible to drought , as suggested by Sahebi et. al.,  and 
further research must be done to find viable solutions to prev ent these recurring droughts from 
affecting rice yield in the US in the future.  
These findings show the vulnerability of rice cultivation in the US to drought events. 
While temperature fluctuations show a less direct  impact on yield growth, the effects of 
drought are starkly evident. As rice cultivation heavily relies on water availability, the recurring 
and consistent occurrence of drought poses a major challenge to sustained productivity. The 
lack of a clear statistical relationship between temperature va riations and yield growth could 
suggest the existence of adaptive mechanisms within rice cultivation practices or the need for 
further analysis that takes into account additional variables. Furthermore, while the 
temperature variations might not exhibit a direct linear correlation with yield growth, their 
indirect impacts on rice growth might still be of interest and warrant further investigation.  
Materials/Methods  7 
 
 This paper relied on county -level month -wise rice yield data obtained from the United 
State s Department of Agriculture (USDA) along with temperature and precipitation data 
collected over the years from 1960 -2020 by counties in the US (National Centers for 
Environmental Information (NCEI), 2023) . It also uses Palmer Drought Severity Index data at  the 
state level collected from 1960 -2020 (National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI), 
2023). The Palmer Drought Severity Index was used because it is one of the most widely used 
indicators for drought monitoring and research (*Wang et al., 2022 ). All datasets were joined 
together in R. To graph how temperature has changed over time during the rice growing and 
harvesting months, the mean of the temperature was taken for these months and then a line 
plot was created by setting Year to the x -axis and the mean temperature to the y -axis. 
Similarly, changes in mean minimum and maximum temperatures were also graphed with 
Year as the x -axis. Linear regression lines were made for each of these graphs to show the 
trend over time. Drought severity was a lso graphed in a similar way over time. Scatterplots and 
linear regression models were created to investigate the relationship between temperature 
changes and drought severity with changes in the yield growth of rice. Yield growth was 
obtained by the formu la log(Yield)  log(lag(Yield)). Linear regression models were created at 
both the county level and at the country level. Since drought data was only available at the 
state level, every county in a state was assigned the same value for the drought index. F or the 
country level evaluation, mean was taken for all three explanatory variables: Change in 
Temperature, Change in the Difference between Minimum and Maximum Temperatures, and 
the Palmer Drought Severity Index as well as Yield Growth to get values at th e country level. A 
linear model was then fit to these datasets and summaries were generated which constitute 
tables 1 and 2.  8 
 
Figure 1 : Graph showing the variation of mean temperatures during crucial rice -growing and 
harvesting months (April -August) from 19 60-2020. The blue line in the figure represents a linear 
line of best fit for temperature values based on time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 : Graphs showing the variation of the mean of the minimum (left) and maximum (right) 
temperatures during rice-growing and harvesting months (April -August) from 1960 -2020. They 
also include a blue linear line of best fit for temperature values based on time.  
Figure 3 : Graph showing the variation in the difference between the mean maximum and 
minimum temperatures during the rice -growing and harvesting months (April -August) from 
1960 -2020. Also includes a linear line of best fit for the difference in temperatures based on 
time.  
 
 
9 
 
Figure 4 : Graph showing the variation of yield growth of rice in the US b ased on the difference 
in mean minimum and maximum temperatures during the rice -growing and harvesting months. 
Also includes a linear line of best fit for the yield growth based on the difference in 
temperature.  
Figure 5 : Graph showing the variation in the  mean Palmer Drought Severity Index from 1960 -
2020 during the rice growing and sowing months (March -July). Also includes a linear line of best 
for the drought severity based on time.  
Figure 6 : Graph showing the variation of yield growth of rice in the US based on change in the 
mean drought severity during the rice -growing and sowing months. Also includes a linear line of 
best fit for the yield growth based on the drought severity.
10 
 
Table 1 : Yield growth of rice in the United States based on the change in mean temperature, change in 
drought severity, and change in the difference between minimum and maximum temperatures. Yield growth 
is given by log(Yield)  log(lag(Yield)). Temperature variables are at the co unty level while drought variable is 
at the state level.
 
Table 2 : Yield growth of rice in the United States based on the change in mean temperature, change in 
drought severity, and change in the difference between minimum and maximum temperatures. Yield  
growth is given by log(Yield)  log(lag(Yield)). All variables are at the country level. Values for the 
variables are the mean taken by year.  
11 
 
References  
1. *Batres -Marquez, S. P., Jensen, H. H., & Upton, J. (2009). Rice Consumption in the 
United States: Recent Evidence from Food Consumption Surveys . Journal of the 
American Dietetic Association , 109(10), 1719 –1727. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2009.07.010  
2. Krishnan, P., Ramakrishnan, B., Reddy, K. R., & Reddy, V. R. (2011, January 1). Chapter 
three - High -Temperature Effects on Rice Growth, Yield, and Grain Quality  (D. L. Sparks, 
Ed.). ScienceDirect; Academic Press.  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780123876898000047  
3. noaa.gov. (2023). Billion -Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters | National Centers for 
Environmental Information  (NCEI). Www.ncei.noaa.gov. 
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/state -summary/US  
4. National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI). (2023, June 23). NOAA Monthly 
U.S. Climate Divisional Database (NCLIMDIV) . 
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/acce ss/metadata/landing -
page/bin/iso?id=gov.noaa.ncdc:C00005  
5. *Oladosu, Y., Rafii, M. Y., Samuel, C., Fatai, A., Magaji, U., Kareem, I., Kamarudin, Z. S., 
Muhammad, I., & Kolapo, K. (2019). Drought Resistance in Rice from Conventional to 
Molecular Breeding: A R eview. International Journal of Molecular Sciences , 20(14), 3519. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20143519  
6. *Sahebi, M., Hanafi, M. M., Rafii, M. Y., Mahmud, T. M. M., Azizi, P., Osman, M., Abiri, 
R., Tahe ri, S., Kalhori, N., Shabanimofrad, M., Miah, G., & Atabaki, N. (2018). 
Improvement of Drought Tolerance in Rice (Oryza sativa L.): Genetics, Genomic Tools, 
and the WRKY Gene Family . BioMed Research International , 2018, 1 –20. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/3158474  
7. *Sen, S., Chakraborty, R., & Kalita, P. (2020). Rice - not just a staple food: A 
comprehensive review on its phytochemicals and therapeutic potential. Trends in Food 
Science and Technology , 97,  265–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.01.022  
8. USDA ERS - Trade. (n.d.). Www.ers.usda.gov . 
https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/rice/trad e/ 
9. USDA ERS - Rice Sector at a Glance. (n.d.). Www.ers.usda.gov. 
https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/rice/rice -sector -at-a-glance/  
10. *Wang, Z., Yang, Y., Zhang, C., Guo,  H., & Hou, Y. (2022). Historical and future Palmer 
Drought Severity Index with improved hydrological modeling. Journal of Hydrology , 610, 
127941. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2022.127941  
11. *Zeigler, R. S., & Barclay, A. (2008). The Relevance of Rice. Rice, 1(1), 3 –10. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12284 -008-9001 -z 